Put on her video and her mic, that'd be appreciated.
Kda, Rachel. Um, thanks for the flexibility this morning.
We've got, um, five minutes with you on your part
of the submission, uh, this morning after hearing from Mark.
Just, um, before our break. Over to you,
KDA. Thanks, Kyle.
Um, oh, KDA, Koto.
Um, and thank you very much for this opportunity.
You've already heard from Mark.
Um, my name's Rachel McIntosh.
I'm National Secretary of E two.
Um, there is nothing in this bill that E two supports.
Uh, we believe that the bill goes against the objects
of the ERA, and I'm gonna focus on two particular points.
One is the need to promote collective bargaining,
and the other one is the inherent power imbalance between,
uh, workers and employers.
Um, so it's definitely, it's absolutely clear that we need
to promote collective bargaining.
There is a productivity gap, which is that wages have lagged
behind productivity increases over the past 35 years,
which means that the fruits
of increased productivity have gone overwhelmingly
to employers, except
where collective bargaining is really strong
and collective bargaining is the only way to remedy that.
Um, and the 30 day rule is one of the few parts
of the Employment Relations Act
that actually does promote collective bargaining.
And this bill removes that 30 day rule where employers,
employees get the right to learn about the collective
agreement where there is one.
Um, and so by removing that, the government is failing
to adhere to one of the objects of the act.
Um, it not only fails to promote it, but
because of the inherent power imbalance
that effectively undermines collective bargaining.
Um, another place where the bill, uh, ch bills changes fail
to promote collective bargaining is the
contract classification changes.
So allowing employers
to effectively unilaterally declare somebody
and a contractor
and, um, not allowing them to, um, to challenge
that and not allowing the courts to challenge that, um,
that also undermines collective bargaining
'cause contractors don't have the right
to collective bargaining.
Um, and then, so moving on to the power imbalance, um,
and staying with the contractor classifications.
Um, the, it definitely tips the balance
of power away from workers to employers,
and that, again, fails to
address the inherent power imbalance
that's both in the classification process itself, um,
which is effectively unilateral, but also subsequent to that
because contractors don't have, have employment rights, so
therefore, um, have less power.
Um, and another area, um, of concern
with the power imbalance is the, um,
personal grievance changes.
And the supposed rationale is openly
to tip the balance back in favor of employers.
And it's simply, there's ample evidence
that power is not unfairly in favor
of workers at the moment.
Um, the superior economic power
of employers flows into all other
aspects of the relationship.
Um, so employees overwhelmingly rely,
rely on their jobs for their living.
Um, it's the only source of income in most cases.
And so depriving a worker
of a job should be an absolutely last resort,
and we should not be making it easier for,
um, employers to do that.
Uh, the introduction of, uh,
essentially the, um, the likelihood of zero remedies
and no reinstatement, um, that
is absolutely tipping the favor, the ba balance
of power in favor of employees.
And it is not necessary. It is unfair.
Um, and, um, in almost all cases,
employees, employees are human beings.
Everybody's a human being, and we are all fallible to.
So to say that if somebody has contributed to a situation,
um, then they essentially have no remedies
and no right to reinstatement, uh,
is a deeply unfair tipping of the balance in favor
of employers and is simply, simply not, um, necessary.
And yeah, those are the main points that I wanted
to cover about the imbalance of power
and about the, um, requirement
to promote collective bargaining.
These are things that are necessary to promote decent work.
And you have read the submission so you know,
the, um, the rest of it.
But those are just the points that I wanted to highlight.
Um, and, um, yeah, our recommendation is
that this bill is not passed, that is not recommended.
Recommended from out of the select committee process. Gilda,
Thanks very much, Rachel.
Um, I think that's all of our time on that this morning.
Really appreciate the time you've taken to submit
and, uh, be available to present.
And now I wanna invite the team from NZEI, um, up to the
virtual desk.
Um, and if we can ask them to turn their video
and their marks on, um, and present, that'd be great,
Kia.
So we've got 10 minutes with you this morning.
I hand over to you and if we can include any time
for questions in that, that would be appreciated.
Uh, uh, Koto, um, course Stephanie Mills,
um, I have with me Al, who I think will start off our,
um, man president.
Um, and in the background,
I think somewhere is, uh, Shannon Walsh.
Dr. Shannon Walsh, our strategic researcher.
Can I pass to you,
Um,
a professional organization
and a union representing nearly 50,000 members employed
as teachers and as leaders in the early childhood education
and primary sectors, including ko,
Maori and ura.
Uh, we also represent support staff from early childhood
through to secondary education school advisors employed
by universities and learning support staff employed
by the Ministry of Education.
We are value led ZI or Waitangi based organization
and have a long history of playing a role,
a positive role in the education sector
and on wider social issues affecting our members
and the TAM that they serve.
Thank you for the opportunity to meet
with the sleek committee to just to discuss our concerns,
uh, with the bill.
And as we outline our submission, we see this bill
as a shameful attack on the rights
and indignity of the working people of
and is one, it is one aspect of the wider suit
of the anti workers legislation advanced by this government.
So we take our submission as read.
We'll begin with a few general comments
before, uh, looking more closely at, uh, changes
to the personal grievance system.
And finally, we'll finish with some reflections
on the recent comments made by the minister com, uh,
concerning the appointments of the ERA.
And while this bill has direct implication for NCDI
to do door members, and in particularly in particular those
employed in early childhood education,
we further note our strong interest as a union in anything
that erodes the rights of working people
and our strong interest as a union
of education professionals in the effect eroding workers'
rights has on the children of those workers.
It is well established that children from households
and precarious and low income work are less likely
to exceed succeed in education
and the peers in more economically secure situations.
The supporters of this bill need to know that by increasing
precarity for workers, reducing their access to justice
and tilting the balance of power
even further towards employee employers, this bill will have
damaging flow on impacts on children of the workers.
It impacts children work through the walk
through the school gates, wearing the stress from home
by reducing protections for workers.
This bill increases that burden for children, Steph.
So, um, as we said, we are particularly concerned
that the one-sided nature of this bill, it fails
to consider the perspectives of the workers
who will be impacted, uh, where there's changes to go
through some of the proposals, um, in our view, um,
could open the door towards, uh, really bad abuses.
And it's a shameful, uh, low blow from the government
to workers who, um,
after all are foundational
to the successful economy of this country.
Um, we agree with others submitters this morning,
including the CTU,
that this bill effectively guts
the personal grievance system.
Um, changes to the PG system are being pursued against the
advice of officials who have warned that there is a prospect
of unjust outcomes where these changes to go ahead.
It's worth reading from the regulatory impact statement,
covering the personal grievance system
and it's advice on the minister's intention
to remove eligibility for remedies for hurt
and humiliation compensation when there is any
contributory employee behavior.
The impact statement gives the following,
example is a potential outcome
where this change to go through.
If someone raised a personal grievance for discrimination
or sexual harassment
and they contributed in any way to the situation which led
to the grievance, they could be denied any hurt
and humiliation compensation.
And we know from the victims of sexual harassment
that this is a really, you know, sets yet another hurdle
and high bar to justice for them in the workplace.
So how can the members
of the committee support this bill in good conscience when
that is a potential outcome?
Um, we believe that the proposals in the bill are being
advanced without evidence or justification.
Despite the profound negative consequences that may occur
for workers, the bill seems to imagine
that we're living in a world where personal grievance claims
with low merit proliferate,
despite this having little basis.
In fact, as is carefully pointed out in the regulatory
impact statement, pursuing a personal grievance claim is a
big deal and take a huge toll on a, on a person
and a worker and their families.
It is never something taken lightly.
There is significant personal
and professional risks for employees
and taking claims, including risks
to their future employment by assuming we have a problem
with low merit claims, the ability
to fix a problem that doesn't exist.
Moreover, and it's a regulatory impact system, uh, sorry,
regulatory impact statement clearly states the objective
to disincentivize disincentivize so-called low merit claims
is in fact at odds with the objective of maintaining access
to justice for those workers.
It is a law designed to address a fictitious problem
that nevertheless significantly impedes
workers access to justice.
Quite, quite frankly, we
and workers will begin to lose faith in regulatory
and legislative processes when they show such clear
disregard for the facts and for good sense.
Um, finally, we wanted to use the opportunity of speaking
with you here today to express our shock
and disappointment at the recent comments made by, um,
minister Van Valant Business Desk,
which are really politicizing appointments to the ERA
and crossing constitutional boundaries.
The minister's comments make the motivation
behind this bill explicit
and clear, which is to tilt the favor further in favor
of employers at the expense of workers' rights
and access to justice politicizing appointments to the ERA
to the benefit of one side
of the employment relationship is a blatant overreach
and a breach of judicial independence.
It erodes the integrity of the ERA
and shatters confidence that workers will get a fair hearing
when taking just claims against their employer.
With that, we are happy to take any questions.
Thank you. Um, Ana,
Thank you very much for your very strong submission
and what you saying.
Uh, I was wondering if you could also talk about the,
your concerns around the chilling, chilling effect
that this would have on teachers, uh,
within your profession, um, uh, with, with, in regards
to these changes, uh, coming through.
Uh, what is, what is that, what could
that look like, uh, for your sector?
What, what could that look like, uh, for
flow on impacts on our children
and impacts for our, our communities,
our communities as well?
Uh, just we answer that, Tiana,
you might just wanna see if you can fix your mark.
It's, I think it's coming badly for a couple of us
Computers. Hopefully,
um, you got the gist of that question.
I, I think so, yes.
Um, I, I'll ask, maybe answer briefly in terms
of the EC space and May,
and Shannon may have more to answer.
Um, I think we're, um, we're moving into territory where,
uh, ECE teachers, um, who are new into a role, for example,
are already facing the challenge
that the government has removed the right
to pay parity for them.
And so when they're in that initial stage of employment,
they're gonna be particularly vulnerable.
So both on this, on the, in the terms of the, the,
the 30 day provision,
but also in terms of personal grievances, um, I, I think
what we could,
could see is a higher tune in teaching as a result.
We could see teachers, um, finding Australia even more, um,
desirable as a location
because there are much stronger, uh, provisions
for teachers in those, um, in that jurisdiction, both ECE
and, uh, te and primary teaching.
Um, and so I think generally it, it starts
to shift the balance about whether it's worth
to staying here if you can both earn more and be more secure
and, um, and also, you know, have natural justice
actually apply if things go wrong in your role.
So I think it's, it's,
it's definitely gonna have a chilling effect on,
on keeping our workforce, which is so critical
ultimately then to the ongoing relationships with children,
Hopefully MyPhone much better.
Yeah, much. Uh, you, you talked about, uh,
earlier about evidence, um,
and it is something that, you know, something I noticed, um,
I, I was wondering what kind
of direction can you give the committee in terms of
where we should be trying to, trying to look to, to, to, uh,
in terms of, um, in terms of evidence which would point
to, um, uh, reform, which is not as destructive
as this one appears to be?
That'd be Shannon, Maybe
Steve. Yeah, I'm happy to answer that.
I mean, the,
the first place is the regulatory impact statements.
Uh, they clearly state, um, that there is the lack
of evidence here and point to areas point to, uh,
for example, the reform
or looking at a, a bigger reform, um, an investigation
of the personal grievance system rather than these kind
of quite blunt, um, changes that are being proposed.
So that would be, uh, my suggestion is to start
with the advice of officials.
Thanks very much. Um, that's all we've got time
for this morning.
Appreciate, uh, the time you've taken to present to us
and for your recent submission.
Uh, members, we are now going back to Lenon Cameron, uh,
from earlier, uh, on the agenda.
So Lenon, if you are, uh, there,
if you can turn your mark on, um,
and your video, that'd be appreciated.
And we've got five minutes, um, with you this morning,
including any time for questions far away.
Hey Koto, thank you for having me.
Uh, my name is Lennon Cameron.
Um, I'm here as an individual citizen
to speak against the proposed fire
out will employment changes.
Um, and I wanna thank you for the opportunity
to appear before you.
Um, I oppose this bill
because I feel that it strips workers of a fear process.
Um, I think it creates insecurity
during a cost of living crisis.
Um, and I think it would lead
to a higher turnover in industries, um, such
as hospitality and retail.
Uh, when I was 18 years old, I used to work in fast food.
Um, my hours each work week,
they weren't based on the performance of me, it was based on
how many customers came through the door.
So a slow week meant
that I had fewer hours the following week.
Um, and that often meant
that I couldn't afford my own basic costs.
Um, so to me that showed
how vulnerable workers are when employers are making these
reactive business decisions.
Um, I think if a fire at will system had been in place,
I probably would've lost my job altogether.
Um, not 'cause I did anything wrong, but
because the business had a bad week.
Um, and I think it isn't fair
and I don't think it builds a stronger workforce.
Um, to me, uh, the bill ignores the wellbeing of, uh,
employees at a time when people are already struggling.
Um, I think it'll worsen a high turnover in roles like
hospitality, which hurts both the workers
and the business ultimately.
Um, and I think it encourages a culture of fear
where people are less likely to speak up when, uh,
there's a safety issue
or if there's unfair treatment, um, going on.
Um, I also want to acknowledge the gap between, uh,
those making these decisions
and those who will feel the impact.
Um, I think many high paid public servants
and mps hold a position that is secure
and it's unlikely to ever be disestablished.
Um, I think that security can create a level of impunity
because they don't face the same stress
that a worker on a low wage necessarily would be facing.
Um, I think for someone living week to week, a sudden,
dismissal doesn't just mean losing a job.
It means losing your only income.
It means you usually have no savings to fall back on.
Um, and you've also still got
to cover things like rent your bills and your food.
Um, I think the mental and financial strain of
that is something that many, uh,
in a stable government role may not experience.
Um, but it is the reality for thousands
of New Zealanders out there.
Um, so my recommendation is to reject the bill
and to instead, uh, protect the right to a fair process
and dismissal and to support businesses through training,
through mentorship and financial measure measures.
Um, not just shifting that risk onto employees.
Um, I think workers aren't the economy's punching bag.
So I think we deserve job security.
I think we deserve respect. I think we deserve fairness.
Um, they keep ine.
Thank you so much. Um, question from Glen Bennett,
Uh, Kiara and thanks for your submission
and, um, putting yourself out there today.
Uh, and I guess you talked about the financial side of it,
but also the, the cost it actually has on your wellbeing,
on your life, in your recommendation.
You mentioned that, um,
that owning a business involves risk, uh, and that,
and that includes a responsibility of treating staff
with respect and due process.
Can you just, um, speak to that briefly please?
Uh, yeah, I think, um, I'm myself in a position where I'm,
uh, launching my own business
and moving into sole trade workforce,
my own sort of security there.
Um, and I think for me, I understand that that is, um,
it does come with that risk.
A business isn't guaranteed to flourish.
It's not guaranteed to be always in the highs.
There are gonna be those lows as well as those peaks.
Um, as I think, uh, in terms of running a business,
when you have staff and when you have these people, um,
under your wings, it becomes your responsibility to know
that the risk
that you've taken on the business is also a risk
for these people and the, uh, their livelihood
and their, their income to survive from there.
So I think that becomes an additional responsibility, um,
on top of running your business when you're kind of,
when you're in charge of the financial
aspect of somebody's life.
Thank you so much. Um,
that is all the questions we have time
for, um, this morning.
Appreciate the time you took to present to the committee
and provide us your written submission. Thanks.
Committee Members, um, we are now breaking to 1220,
um, for the final set of, um, hearings for the subcommittee.
So, uh, if everyone can be back online at, um, 20 past 12,
thanks very much.